I'm Martin dawn on the wildlife
filmmaker my first camera I cut my lens
off with a carving knife to see how the
shelter worked it was always in a sense
lack of resources that drives innovation
certainly doing macro photography when I
was doing it there was very very little
off-the-shelf equipment for doing it it
was very little kind of instruction how
to do it so when I discovered that I
could make an extension tube out of
sellotape and a toilet roll that began
an improvisation process possibly that
never really stopped
essentially it starts off with a problem
the problem is that I want to see this
thing I mean if you take something
really simple let's take our Myint one
of the most spectacular ants of all but
if you're going you in near them no the
run away out there tactic you can't just
film them in the normal way and so in
order to film a me answers when we made
a thing years ago called ant camp and
it's now evolved into franking can which
is a much more compact more precise
thing that device solved all of those
problems in one hit and gave us the most
extraordinary freedom to film in the
world and you could certainly observe
really tiny details of their behavior in
a way that you know has never been done
before and so ultimately ant cam was a
desire to solve the problem night
photography has been a much harder
battle all the things we take for
granted about filming in the daytime we
no longer have you know the the thing
out of the corner of your eye that draws
you in your ear oh this is going to
happen well you don't have that at night
you don't know what's going to happen
next
often filming at night yeah we struggled
for years for the image intensifiers
trying to make images that people were
interested in and
you know in the end they were kind of
gray well maybe we made them a bit blue
and they were always a bit green but
when the thermal cameras came around
these cameras here when they arrived
that transformed everything for us
because it meant we had somewhere to go
when the grainy image got too bad but it
also meant that we could actually see
much further than we ever could with
more clarity and it enabled us to feel
more as we do in daytime because we
could get a better sense of the
surroundings we could see which animals
were coming in and we could see what was
going to happen next so for me being
able to understand night and see at
night this has been a much bigger
advance certainly there's lots of lots
more interesting behavior at night that
are more subdued in the data and just
because of the heat revelations come
thick and fast when you're filming stuff
in detail quite often you're the first
person to truly observe this animal in
the detail by going into darkness then
suddenly shows animals behaving quite
differently and you know for me the
revelation was that light levels are
controlling the way nocturnal animals
behave to a very large degree on the
plains of the masai mara and it's a
pattern I've now seen over and again
that essentially if the moon is out
liyan's
because of the short grass will win
those short grass lines don't even
bother to hunt except to steal hyena
kills whereas a starlet bites lions can
hunt anything they want with impunity
camouflage is such that in black and
white for example and to the
monochromatic vision of any animal in
that light level a lion on ordinary
grass is invisible it's perfectly
counter shaded against starlight
but there are other things you know very
recently I film dolphins that night in
bioluminescence which is an image that
I'd read about and I really wanted to
try and film that always doubted whether
or not it was truly possible with a
starlight camera that we've developed
especially to do that and it worked well
I think as a filmmaker the greatest
challenge is to get people to be
interested in dark grainy images of the
night but at the same time I've worked
really hard to make them more attractive
and I think you've got to a point where
they're attractive enough to truly tell
a story we can therefore the challenge
then is to film in the deep ocean at
night in color